===============================
Data formats used by Nextstrain
===============================

Nextstrain uses a few different kinds of `JSON
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON>`__ files at various stages in a typical
build.

The primary JSON files used by Nextstrain are those consumed by Auspice to
display a dataset.  Without these **dataset files**, Auspice has nothing to
display.  These files are typically the final output of a build and produced by
the Augur command :doc:`augur export <augur:usage/cli/export>`.  They come in
two versions:

v2
  Newer format, with a filename of your choosing like ``${name}.json``.  This
  is often referred to as the **"main" file**.

v1
  Original format, with filenames like ``${name}_tree.json`` and
  ``${name}_meta.json``, often referred to as the **"tree" and "meta" files**.

Secondary JSON files used by Nextstrain come in two flavors: **sidecar** files
and **node data** files.

**Sidecar files** are produced by Augur for direct consumption by Auspice,
alongside the primary JSON files described above.  They come in two types with
filenames enforced by convention:

root-sequence
  Filenames like ``${name}_root-sequence.json``, produced by ``augur export
  v2``'s ``--include-root-sequence`` option.

tip-frequencies
  Filenames like ``${name}_tip-frequencies.json``, produced by :doc:`augur
  frequencies <augur:usage/cli/frequencies>` with the ``--output-format auspice
  --output â€¦`` options.

**Node data** files are typically produced by various Augur commands such as
:doc:`augur traits <augur:usage/cli/traits>` or :doc:`augur ancestral
<augur:usage/cli/ancestral>` and are then fed into :doc:`augur export
<augur:usage/cli/export>` to be merged together into a final output for
Auspice.  Node data files can have any filename you want but some common names
are:

  - ``nt_muts.json``
  - ``aa_muts.json``
  - ``traits.json``
  - ``branch_lengths.json``
  - ``${name}_aa-mutation-frequencies.json``
  - ``${name}_entropy.json``
  - ``${name}_frequencies.json``
  - ``${name}_sequences.json``
  - ``${name}_titers.json``

Node data files have a :doc:`generic structure <augur:usage/json_format>` to
allow them to contain all kinds of data about your tree.

In advanced builds, custom node data files are often produced by build-specific
scripts in addition to the ones produced by Augur commands.  For example, our
`ncov build <https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov>`__ produces a custom
``epiweeks.json`` node data file using `this workflow step
<https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/blob/cee806f/workflow/snakemake_rules/main_workflow.smk#L1127-L1143>`__
and `this script
<https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov/blob/cee806f/scripts/calculate_epiweek.py>`__.

Similarly, it's possible for other bioinformatics software to produce
compatible dataset JSONs (primary or sidecars) for use by Auspice; they aren't
required to be generated by Augur, although that is the most common way.
Augur's :doc:`validation command <augur:usage/cli/validate>` can check that
dataset JSONs have the required schema.

Once you have Nextstrain JSON files, you can visualize and share them in a
variety of ways.  See :doc:`our guide to sharing your results
</guides/share/index>` to find a way that meets your needs for privacy and
collaboration.
